Welcome to our last lecture about SPARK data frames where we're going to be discussing working the dates
and time stamps up over the Jupiter notebook and work again with some historical stock data and work
with that date column OK I've opened up a Jupiter notebook and I've imported Sparke session and I created
a spark session called dates.
You can feel free to use any Sparke session that you've done the past and from the spark session I will
say physical to spark read that CXXVI and I'm going to read in the Apple stock cxxviii from earlier
and we'll call it letter is true and will last say in for schema to be true.
That way we can actually see that we have the date objects.
So if I say if I had one I can see that the very first item is a date time date time object and that's
how Python deals with date time objects.
And you can see it has some information.
The year 2010 the month is one day is 4 and then hours 0 minutes are 0 and actually for all of these
they're all going to have the same minute and hour 00.
So for example let me show you the actual data frame itself.
Now looks a little messed up here because I'm kind of zoomed in and there's just not enough space to
display everything.
So that gives you a neater picture.
You select and just show two columns.
So I'll show the date column and maybe I'll also show the opening price column.
So we run that and we can see we have the date column has the year the month the day and then the hours
minutes and even some seconds depending on how many seconds are nanoseconds etcetera.
But we can see that they all basically be at the very beginning of the day hours 0 minutes.
So we're going to basically show you how you can extract information from this date time object.
And essentially what it all comes down to is importing the right function and then applying it.
Let me hash tag this out run this again.
And now I'm going to walk through some functions that you may find useful.
We'll say from PI spark thought sequel functions import and then some really useful ones.
We're not going to go through all of these but I do want you to be aware of all of them is day of month
and you want to extract the actual day of the month.
There's our There's the day of year is another one.
So that's like was it the first day of the year or the 40th day of the year.
Cetera.
There's also a month or so first second third month etc. what year it was so year 2010 year 2011 stuff
like that.
Now let me kind of put these on multiple lines.
So years another one there's also week of year which is kind of an interesting one so goes you know
anywhere from the first week of the year to the 50 second week of the year and then we'll continue on
to some formatting and so format number which we've seen before may be useful to us later on.
But there's also data formats which you may find useful if you want to format your data in a particular
manner.
So I'm going to import all of those and just show you how to use them.
We won't walk through every single one because it'll get a little repetitive but you should be aware
of how to use them.
Basically whenever using any PI sparked thought sequela function you say select and then you just call
the function on whatever column you want and you have to pass in the actual column meaning you have
to use that bracket notation.
So for example let's grab the day of the month and let's pass and DMF date and show those results.
And here we can see we have day of month dates.
And I can actually see the day of the month.
Was it the fourth the fifth.
Six seven eight.
Cetera.
And you can see here that we're actually skipping weekends which is why some of these dates kind of
have some gaps in between them.
So that makes sense.
Let's kind of show you another example.
Let's confirm that it all starts at the beginning of the day.
Biographic hour.
So these should all be zero.
And there we can see it was all zeros maybe we want to see some more information like what month was
it.
So the actual month it was.
If you run that should all be the very first month or January.
And we can continue on.
It's only showing the top 20 rows.
You can see here.
February started to appear at the very bottom of that.
And that's basically the gist of it.
So let's kind of show a different example.
Maybe we wanted to know the average closing price per year.
So this may be a more realistic assignments if you want to know the average closing price per year.
We can use these functions right here to actually grab that.
So it's going to be in several steps.
I will select passen year on the date column and let me just show you what that looks like.
So I can see here it all starts from 2010 and then what I end up doing is I'm going to use with column
to create a new column called The Year.
So let's kind of hash tag that out and build that out.
So we will say if with column remember that's how we can create a new column or create a new column
called The Year and it will be year function called on the dates and just to show what that looks like
it's going to be pretty messy.
But I just want to show that there is some year column at the very end.
So at the very end though we're here I can see that there is a year column and it's right here.
2010.
2010 2010 etc..
Great.
So what we're going to do is put this as a new data frame.
A cool new idea is equal to the fifth column and I will delete that show because I'm just saving it
instead of showing it.
So there's new death and then off of new DNA.
Remember my goal here is to show the average closing price per year.
So there's more than one year in this actual result.
I want to go into a new leaf group by that newly created your column and then I want the average saw
just call me off of this and let's just show what happens when we do this so running this I can see
the average but I'm actually averaging everything by the year so it's getting kind of sloppy.
All I want to know is the average closing price per year so let's just select those and I'm going to
select those off with this column.
There's various ways to do this.
And one way we can do it is just say select But remember these are now called average and year.
And what's a little funny is that it says average year over here so we can just say year as well.
So let's do that.
I'm going to say year let's pass this in in brackets.
And then the next one I want let's close those brackets is going to be very close to the average close
average open average close you can kind of explore whatever you want.
The main ideas used in this group by date time functionality.
And if I show this I can see here that I have now the average closing price per year 2015 2013 etc..
So let me actually save that as a result.
Because I still want to format this a little more just looks a little nicer.
So we'll say result.
And now if I show this result it's the exact same thing but I want to fix this significant issue maybe
order these.
And also maybe change this average close.
So we'll say here with column renamed and I'm going to rename average close
and I want this to be called maybe like
average I don't know average closing price just something a little nicer and let's actually show this
make sure it all worked out.
So we see average closing price so that's looking pretty good.
So I'll say this as a result.
Well let's call it new.
Does it really matter what you call it because it still wants whip's excellently had show there.
So I don't want show when I'm saving it.
There we go.
And now for this new the last thing I want to do is actually format that number so we'll say new selects
and I'm going to select in this case we'll call it average closing price because that's what the name
of the column is now.
So I want to select the average closing price and I'm going to pass format number around it.
So we'll say select Format number and as the second argument I'm going to pass in two digits and then
we'll close parentheses.
And I'm also going to passen I want the year column as well.
And I always play it safe and pass this in as a list.
It should technically work even if we don't pass in a list but better just in case.
And let's run this and see what happens if we show this.
And there it is again the issue is here.
So we have forment number etc. so I probably shouldn't have wasted my time with the column renamed.
That's something that I kind of always forget.
So we can just easily fixed that with alias.
So we'll say average close run that again.
And here I can see average close looking nice.
And then is also looking nice.
Hopefully that kind of gave you an idea of some more realistic operations when dealing with date time.
So a really common exercise is to have that date column some sort of date time object extract information
from it and then possibly do an order by or a group by.
Or some sort of functionality off of that extract that information from the date.
The basic idea though is if you just scroll up here there's functions in Paice sparked up sequel that
relate to dates and time stamps.
You just apply it extract the information and then do whatever you want with that information.
All right.
Put that was pretty straightforward.
Feel free to ask any questions in the Q&A forums.
I'll see you at the next section of the course.